v3.2: `$self` field (Alternative Approach) (#4556)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: src/oas.md

Author: When you actually retrieved something, it's the retrieval URL.  When you supply it as a simulation of having retrieved it, it's more properly a retrieval URI, which is how RFC3986 states it.

So if we only use one, it should be retrieval URI, not retrieval URL.

Reviewer: Fine with me, as long as it is consistent 😎

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specification-extensions).

> Implementations MAY choose to support referencing OpenAPI Documents that contain `$self` by another URI such as the retrieval URI, however this behavior is not interoperable and relying on it is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Author: @ralfhandl As stated in RFC2119, "SHOULD" and "RECOMMENDED" are equivalent, as are their negations.  So anything that is NOT RECOMMENDED is something that you SHOULD NOT do, and therefore you SHOULD do the other thing (in this case, use the `$self` URI as your reference target).

I can add a sentence making that explicit if you think it is needed.

-----

This came from a discussion with @karenetheridge about other ambiguities with `$id`.  Let's say that you have enabled auto-retrieval of references, treating them as URLs (because you have some reason to believe that will work, like the OAD author said so, out-of-band).  If you successfully retrieve a referenced document from X because one `$ref` used X, and it has a `$self` URI of Y... you've already retrieved it from X.  Can you keep referencing it as X or do you _have_ to reference it as Y, even though you know X works because you just got it there?

This is a weird case.  With JSON Schema, we made a mistake and didn't talk about it, as @karenetheridge pointed out.  But intuitively, most people seem to think that if you can use X successfully, and particularly if you _already_ used X as the retrieval UR***L*** (actually retrieved, not just supplied as the "yeah if you retrieved this you woudl have gotten it from X" simulated retrieval UR***I***) once and it worked, then X should keep working.

You can come up with a similar situation where the "other" URI is from an encapsulated entity (`multipart/related` example) or even an application-supplied default.  These get harder and harder to contrive, but it's possible.

I don't want to require (MUST) that implementations support these messy situations.  Implementations really SHOULD NOT perform unrestricted retrieval automatically as it's a security nightmare.  To say nothing of the weird contortions needed to justify the other possible sources.

But if you are supporting retrieval, you can easily get into this situation where someone uses a retrieval URL that does not match `$self`, and it works, and you have to decide whether to keep letting it work or not.

This sentence allows implementations to keep letting that work if they want to, without requiring it.  Given the history of `$ref`, particularly in 2.0 (and arguably 3.0) where it is strictly a URL, many tools almost certainly behave this way already.  This sentence gives them the flexibility to leave that in place (and keep compatibility for their existing 3.1 customers) while adding the new 3.2 functionality.

Does that help?  Again, I can tack on "Therefore, for interoperability, OAD authors SHOULD _(or even MUST?  Techncially it's not interoperable otherwise?)_ ensure their reference target URIs align with `$self`." or something to that effect if you think it is needed.

> Implementations MAY choose to support referencing OpenAPI Documents that contain `$self` by another URI such as the retrieval URI, however this behavior is not interoperable and relying on it is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation, that is what I _guessed_ the text wants to express. Please add the explicit positive instruction "OAD authors SHOULD...".

> Implementations MAY choose to support referencing OpenAPI Documents that contain `$self` by another URI such as the retrieval URI, however this behavior is not interoperable and relying on it is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Author: @ralfhandl already done https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/4556/files#diff-a662b9afa95a60c2a67cc48014a8d5e00fa6ab2bd5ba2a54531674a5dd398c73R390

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specification-extensions).

> Implementations MAY choose to support referencing OpenAPI Documents that contain `$self` by another URI such as the retrieval URI, however this behavior is not interoperable and relying on it is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Author: I see your point but this reworking doesn't quite feel right, and also as noted elsewhere, we should standardize on retrieval URI rather than URL.  I will rework it.

For OpenAPI Documents, this source is the OpenAPI Object's `$self` field, while for Schema Objects that contain a `$id`, or are a subschema of a Schema Object containing a `$id`, the source is the `$id` field:

Assume the retrieval URI of the following document is `file://home/someone/src/api/openapi.yaml`:

```YAML
openapi: 3.2.0
$self: https://example.com/api/openapi
info:
  title: Example API
  version: 1.0
paths:
  /foo:
    get:
      requestBody:
        $ref: "shared#/components/requestBodies/Foo"
```

Assume the retrieval URI for the following document is `https://git.example.com/shared/blob/main/shared/foo.yaml`:

```YAML
openapi: 3.2.0
$self: https://example.com/api/shared/foo
info:
  title: Shared components for all APIs
  version: 1.0
components:
  requestBodies:
    Foo:
      content:
        application/json:
          schema:
            $ref: ../schemas/foo
  schemas:
    Foo:
      $id: https://example.com/api/schemas/foo
      properties:
        bar:
          $ref: bar
    Bar:
      $id: https://example.com/api/schemas/bar
      type: string
```

In this example, the retrieval URIs are irrelevant because both documents define `$self`.

> For the relative `$ref` in the first document, it is resolved against `$self` to produce `https://example.com/shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo`.

Reviewer 2: This did not look right to me, but I am far from an expert on URI resolution, so I had GitHub Copilot create a Jupyter notebook to implement the URI resolution logic in RFC 3986 Section 5.2. According to this program, the target URI is actually "https://example.com/api/shared#/components/requestBodies/Foo".

Here's a link to the code if you want to have a look.

https://github.com/mikekistler/UriResolution

The notebook includes 42 tests that it extracted from the RFC and these all pass, I have some confidence that it is working correctly.

Reviewer: Using `node` interactively produces
~~~pwsh
> new URL("./shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo","https://example.com/openapi")
URL {
  href: 'https://example.com/shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo',
  origin: 'https://example.com',
  protocol: 'https:',
  username: '',
  password: '',
  host: 'example.com',
  hostname: 'example.com',
  port: '',
  pathname: '/shared/foo',
  search: '',
  searchParams: URLSearchParams {},
  hash: '#/components/requestBodies/Foo'
}
~~~
which is exactly what the current PR text says.

Abstaining from debugging AI-generated code...

Reviewer 2: It looks like I passed the wrong values into my UriResolution tool. Doing my best to be careful now:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ba5f5985-80c7-4c55-b0e1-d50fa3797113)

- "the relative `$ref` in the first document" is "shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo", and
- `$self` (in the first document) is "https://example.com/api/openapi"

Using the correct values, I now get

<img width="531" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd973851-7fa2-480f-9978-892a2c75c110" />

I did check this against `node` and I think it gives the same result.

The portion of that URI before the '#' matches the `$self` of the second document, so the reference target is resolved to `#/components/requestBodies/Foo` in that second document.

> In that document, the `$ref` in the Request Body Object is resolved using that document's `$self` as the base URI, producing `https://example.com/schemas/foo`.

Author: @mikekistler should be fixed.  Really, "these look wrong" would have been sufficient here.  The errors were just because I reworked the various paths at some point to make the examles cover more cases, and some things didn't get updated post-rework.  Nothing obscure was going on.

Although it sounds like you produced something useful beyond this which is cool!

The portion of that URI before the '#' matches the `$self` of the second document, so the reference target is resolved to `#/components/requestBodies/Foo` in that second document.

In that document, the `$ref` in the Request Body Object is resolved using that document's `$self` as the base URI, producing `https://example.com/api/schemas/foo`.
This matches the `$id` at `#/components/schemas/Foo/$id` so it points to that Schema Object.
That Schema Object has a subschema with `$ref: bar`, which is resolved against the `$id` to produce `https://example.com/api/schemas/bar`, which matches the `$id` at `#/components/schemas/Bar/$id`.

To guarantee interoperability, Schema Objects containing an `$id`, or that are under a schema containing an `$id`, MUST be referenced by the nearest such `$id` for the non-fragment part of the reference.
As the JSON Schema specification notes, using a base URI other than the nearest `$id` and crossing that `$id` with a JSON Pointer fragment [is not interoperable](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-json-pointer-fragments-and-).

> Note also that it is impossible for the reference at `#/components/schemas/Foo/properties/bar/$ref` to reference the schema at `#/components/schemas/Bar` using _only_ a JSON Pointer fragment, as the JSON Pointer would be resolved relative to `https://example.com/api/schemas/foo`, not to the OpenAPI Document's base URI from `$self`.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't this cause quite a lot of 3.1 descriptions to be broken in 3.2? Or only if the `$self` field is actually used?

Author: @lornajane this is not new- `$id` says that the Schema Object that contains it is the root of a resource with the given base URI, which means that fragment references stay within that resource (resolved relative to that base, and not to the base of the overall document- the distinction between document and resource is discussed in-depth in the JSON Schema specification.

    Foo:
      content:
        application/json:
          schema:
            $ref: ../schemas/foo
  schemas:
    Foo:
      $id: https://example.com/api/schemas/foo
      properties:
        bar:
          $ref: bar
    Bar:
      $id: https://example.com/api/schemas/bar
      type: string
```

In this example, the retrieval URIs are irrelevant because both documents define `$self`.

For the relative `$ref` in the first document, it is resolved against `$self` to produce `https://example.com/api/shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo`.
The portion of that URI before the '#' matches the `$self` of the second document, so the reference target is resolved to `#/components/requestBodies/Foo` in that second document.

In that document, the `$ref` in the Request Body Object is resolved using that document's `$self` as the base URI, producing `https://example.com/api/schemas/foo`.
This matches the `$id` at `#/components/schemas/Foo/$id` so it points to that Schema Object.
That Schema Object has a subschema with `$ref: bar`, which is resolved against the `$id` to produce `https://example.com/api/schemas/bar`, which matches the `$id` at `#/components/schemas/Bar/$id`.

> Note that referring to a schema with a JSON Pointer that crosses a Schema Object with a `$id` [is not interoperable](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-json-pointer-fragments-and-).
> The JSON Schema specification does not address the case of using a pointer _to_ a Schema Object containing an `$id` without crossing into that Schema Object.
> Therefore it is RECOMMENDED that OAD authors use `$id` values to reference such schemas rather than JSON Pointers.

Reviewer: Try to formulate this as a positive requirement:

```suggestion
Note that a Schema Object with a `$id` SHOULD be referenced by its `$id` value because the JSON Schema specification does not address the case of using a [JSON Pointer to a Schema Object containing an `$id`](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-json-pointer-fragments-and-).
```

Author: I don't think your restatement quite captures everything, but I will look at it and see what I can do.

> Note also that it is impossible for the reference at `#/components/schemas/Foo/properties/bar/$ref` to reference the schema at `#/components/schemas/Bar` using a JSON Pointer, as the JSON Pointer would be resolved relative to `https://example.com/api/schemas/foo`, not to the OpenAPI Document's base URI from `$self`.
> 

Reviewer: Is this something that a lot of people try to do despite it being impossible? Maybe remove this paragraph.

```suggestion
```

Author: Yes, many people don't understand that the `$id` creates what's essentially a new scope, so I would prefer not to remove this.

This is common for Schema Objects encapsulated within an OpenAPI Document.
An example of an OpenAPI Document itself being encapsulated in another entity would be a `multipart/related` archive ([[?RFC2557]]), such as the following `multipart/related; boundary="boundary-example"; type="application/openapi+yaml"` document.
Note that this is purely an example, and support for such multipart documents or any other format that could encapsulate an OpenAPI Document is not a requirement of this specification.

RFC2557 was written to allow sending hyperlinked sets of documents as email attachments, in which case there would not be a retrieval URI for the multipart attachment (although the format could also be used in HTTP as well).

```MULTIPART
--boundary-example
Content-Type: application/openapi+yaml
Content-Location: https://example.com/api/openapi.yaml

openapi: 3.2.0
info:
  title: Example API
  version: 1.0
  externalDocs:
    url: docs.html
components:
  requestBodies:
    Foo:
      content:
        application/json:
          schema:
            $ref: "#/components/api/schemas/Foo"
  schemas:
    Foo:
      properties:
        bar:
          $ref: schemas/bar
--boundary-example

> Content-Type: application/schema+json; schema=https://spec.openapis.org/oas/3.2/schema-base/YYYY-MM-DD

Reviewer: The `schema=...` media type parameter is surprising and doesn't seem to be defined by [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core#name-application-schemajson) - can we please remove it?

Author: @ralfhandl that paraeter has always been part of JSON Schema.  I believe the situation in that draft is the result of an incomplete removal of the media type registration, which moved to [draft-ietf-httpapi-rest-api-mediatypes](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-httpapi-rest-api-mediatypes-04.html#name-identifying-a-schema-via-a-).  However, after draft-ietf-httpapi-rest-api-mediatypes-04, JSON Schema was split out, and due to the current JSON Schema team's abandonment of the IETF, has not be placed in a new draft.

But the `schema` media type parameter has been supported for over a decade and is correct, and this is the correct usage.

<html>
  <head>
    <title>API Documentation</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Awesome documentation goes here</p>
  </body>
</html>
--boundary-example
```

In this example, the URI for each part, which also serves as its base URI, comes from the part's `Content-Location` header as specified by RFC2557.
Since the Schema Object at `#/components/schemas/Foo` does not contain an `$id`, the reference in its subschema uses the OpenAPI Document's base URI, which is taken from the `Content-Location` header of its part within the `multipart/related` format.
The resulting reference to `https://example.com/schemas/bar` matches the `Content-Location` header of the second part, which according to RFC2557 allows the reference target to be located within the multipart archive.

Similarly, the `url` field of the [External Documentation Object](#external-documentation-object) is resolved against the base URI from `Content-Location`, producing `https://example.com/api/docs.html` which matches the `Content-Location` of the third part.

### Base URI From the Retrieval URI

If no base URI is provided from either of the previous sources, the next source is the retrieval URI (RFC 3986 Section 5.1.3).

> For this example, assume that the YAML OpenAPI Document was retrieved from `https://example.com/api/openapis.yaml` and the JSON Schema document from `https://example.com/api/schemas/foo`
> 

Reviewer: This paragraph seems to be completely redundant.
```suggestion
```

### Resolving Relative `$self` and `$id`

Let's re-consider the first example in this appendix, but with relative URI-references for `$self` and `$id`, and retrieval URLs that support that relative usage:

Assume that the following is retrieved from `https://staging.example.com/api/openapi`:

```YAML
openapi: 3.2.0
$self: /api/openapi
info:
  title: Example API
  version: 1.0
paths:
  /foo:
    get:
      requestBody:
        $ref: "shared/foo#/components/requestBodies/Foo"
```

Assume the retrieval URI for the following document is `https://staging.example.com/api/shared/foo`:

```YAML
openapi: 3.2.0
$self: /api/shared/foo
info:
  title: Shared components for all APIs
  version: 1.0
components:
  requestBodies:
    Foo:
      content:
        application/json:
          schema:
            $ref: ../schemas/foo
  schemas:
    Foo:
      $id: /api/schemas/foo
      properties:
        bar:
          $ref: bar
    Bar:
      $id: /api/schemas/bar
      type: string
```

> In this example, All of the `$self` and `$id` values are relative URI-references consisting of an absolute path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, all of the `$self` and `$id` values are relative URI-references consisting of an absolute path.
```
